# verification

Run the model and get a goodness-of-fit value by comparing the simulated
values against observations for the optimum parameter set found by
optimisation

## Usage

``` r
verification(fn="hydromod", par, ..., control=list(), 
             model.FUN=NULL, model.FUN.args=list(),
             change.type="repl", refValue=NULL )
```

## Arguments

- fn:

  character, name of a valid R function to be optimised or character
  value 'hydromod'. When `fn='hydromod'` the algorithm uses `model.FUN`
  and `model.FUN.args` to extract the values simulated by the model and
  to compute its corresponding goodness-of-fit function. When
  `fn!='hydromod'` the algorithm uses the value(s) returned by `fn` as
  both model output and its corresponding goodness-of-fit.  

  When `fn='hydromod'` the algorithm will optimise the model defined by
  `model.FUN` and `model.args`

- ...:

  OPTIONAL. Only used when `fn!='hydromod' & fn!='hydromodInR'`.  

  further arguments to be passed to `fn`.

- par:

  numeric, or matrix/data.frame with the parameter sets that will be
  used for verification.  

  Parameter sets in `par` must be stored by row, i.e., each different
  row represents a different parameter set

- control:

  a list of control parameters. See ‘Details’.

- model.FUN:

  OPTIONAL. Only used when `fn='hydromod'`.  

  character, valid R function representing the model code to be
  calibrated/optimised

- model.FUN.args:

  OPTIONAL. Only used when `fn='hydromod'`.  

  list with the arguments to be passed to `model.FUN`

- change.type:

  OPTIONAL. Used only when `fn='hydromodInR'`. Character of length 1 or
  length equal to the number of parameters, indicating how the parameter
  sets in `par` are converted to the parameter values passed to
  `model.FUN`. Valid values are `"repl"` for replacement, `"addi"` for
  additive changes, and `"mult"` for multiplicative changes. A single
  value is recycled to all parameters. The default `"repl"` preserves
  the previous behaviour.

- refValue:

  OPTIONAL. Used only when `fn='hydromodInR'` and any element of
  `change.type` is `"addi"` or `"mult"`. Numeric reference value of
  length 1 or length equal to the number of parameters, used to compute
  the parameter values passed to `model.FUN`. Only parameters using
  `"addi"` or `"mult"` require and use their corresponding reference
  value.

## Details

The `control` argument is a list that can supply any of the following
components:

- drty.in:

  character, path to the directory storing the input files required for
  PSO, i.e. ‘ParamRanges.txt’ and ‘ParamFiles.txt’.

- drty.out:

  character, path to the directory storing the output files generated by
  hydroPSO.

- digits:

  OPTIONAL. Only used when `write2disk=TRUE`.  

  numeric, number of significant digits used for writing the outputs in
  scientific notation

- gof.name:

  character, ONLY used for identifying the goodness-of-fit of each model
  run and writing it to the Verification-logfile.txt,
  Verification-ParamValues.txt output files.

- MinMax:

  character, indicates whether the optimum value for the analysed
  problem corresponds to the minimum or maximum of the the objective
  function. It is used to select the ‘best’ parameter set.  

  Valid values are in: `c('min', 'max')`

- do.plots:

  logical, if TRUE a PNG plot with the comparison between observed and
  simulated values should be produced.

- write2disk:

  logical, indicates if the output files will be written to the disk.

- verbose:

  logical, if TRUE progress messages are printed.

- parallel:

  character, indicates how to parallelise ‘verification’ (to be precise,
  only the evaluation of the objective function `fn` is parallelised).
  Valid values are:  

  -)none: no parallelisation is made (this is the default value)  

  -)multicore: DEPRECATED. The former multicore package is no longer
  available from CRAN. For backward compatibility,
  `parallel="multicore"` is automatically changed to
  `parallel="parallel"` on Unix-like systems and to
  `parallel="parallelWin"` on Microsoft Windows.  

  -)parallel: parallel computations using a ‘FORK’ cluster created with
  [`makeForkCluster`](https://rdrr.io/r/parallel/makeCluster.html). FORK
  clusters are available only on Unix-like operating systems, such as
  GNU/Linux and macOS. They are not supported on Microsoft Windows; on
  Windows, `parallel="parallel"` is automatically changed to
  `parallel="parallelWin"`.  

  -)parallelWin: parallel computations using a ‘PSOCK’ cluster created
  with [`makeCluster`](https://rdrr.io/r/parallel/makeCluster.html).
  PSOCK clusters are the only parallel cluster option supported by
  parallel on Microsoft Windows, and they also work on Unix-like
  systems.  

  For both `parallel="parallel"` and `parallel="parallelWin"`,
  `fn.name="hydromod"` and `fn.name="hydromodInR"` model runs are
  distributed one parameter set at a time using the selected cluster.
  Ordinary R objective functions are evaluated row-wise with the
  [`parRapply`](https://rdrr.io/r/parallel/clusterApply.html) function
  of the parallel package.  

  On Unix-like systems, FORK clusters are usually faster than PSOCK
  clusters because workers inherit the parent R session and require less
  explicit object/package export. PSOCK clusters are more portable but
  usually have higher startup and data-transfer overhead, especially
  when large objects must be sent to workers.

- par.nnodes:

  OPTIONAL. Used only when `parallel!='none'`  

  numeric, indicates the number of cores/CPUs to be used in the local
  multi-core machine, or the number of nodes to be used in the network
  cluster. By default `par.nnodes` is set to the amount of cores
  detected by
  [`detectCores`](https://rdrr.io/r/parallel/detectCores.html).

- par.pkgs:

  OPTIONAL. Used only when `parallel='parallelWin'`  

  list of package names (as characters) that need to be loaded on each
  PSOCK worker for allowing the objective function `fn` to be evaluated.

- par.env:

  OPTIONAL. Used only when `parallel!='none'`  

  environment from which the objects required by the objective function
  `fn`, `model.FUN`, `out.FUN`, or `gof.FUN` are exported to PSOCK
  workers. By default, the environment from which `verification` is
  called is used.

- par.export:

  OPTIONAL. Used only when `parallel!='none'`  

  character vector with the names of additional objects to be exported
  from `par.env` to PSOCK workers. By default, all functions in
  `par.env` are exported.

## Value

A list of four elements:  

- gofs:

  numeric with the goodness-of-fit values corresponding to each one of
  the parameter sets provided in `par`

.

- model.values:

  data.frame with the model outputs corresponding to each one of the
  parameter sets provided in `par`

.

- best.param:

  numeric with the parameter values of the "best" paraemter set found
  during the verification period

.

- best.gof:

  numeric with the goodness-of-fit of the "best" parameter set found
  during the verification period

## Author

Mauricio Zambrano-Bigiarini, <mzb.devel@gmail.com>

## See also

[`hydromod`](http://mzb.cl/hydroPSO/reference/hydromod.md),
[`hydromodInR`](http://mzb.cl/hydroPSO/reference/hydromodInR.md)

## Examples

``` r
## R-external model verification with parameter metadata in 'drty.in'.
## The shell script used here is skipped on Windows.
if (.Platform$OS.type != "windows") {

  model.drty <- tempfile("verification-model-")
  drty.in    <- file.path(model.drty, "PSO.in")
  drty.out   <- tempfile("verification-out-")
  dir.create(drty.in, recursive=TRUE)

  writeLines("      0.00", file.path(model.drty, "input.txt"))

  writeLines(
    c("ParameterNmbr ParameterName MinValue MaxValue",
      "1 P1 0 10"),
    file.path(drty.in, "ParamRanges.txt")
  )

  writeLines(
    c("ParameterNmbr ParameterName Filename Row.Number Col.Start Col.End Decimals",
      "1 P1 input.txt 1 1 10 2"),
    file.path(drty.in, "ParamFiles.txt")
  )

  exe.fname <- file.path(model.drty, "run.model")
  writeLines(c("#!/bin/sh", "exit 0"), exe.fname)
  Sys.chmod(exe.fname, mode="0755")

  read_model_output <- function(file) {
    value <- as.numeric(trimws(readLines(file, warn=FALSE)[1]))
    c(value, value + 1)
  }

  sum_gof <- function(sim, obs) {
    sum(sim - obs)
  }

  out <- verification(
    fn="hydromod",
    par=matrix(c(1.25, 2.50), ncol=1),
    control=list(drty.in=drty.in, drty.out=drty.out, verbose=FALSE),
    model.FUN=hydromod,
    model.FUN.args=list(
      param.files="ParamFiles.txt",
      param.ranges="ParamRanges.txt",
      model.drty=model.drty,
      exe.fname=exe.fname,
      out.FUN=read_model_output,
      out.FUN.args=list(file=file.path(model.drty, "input.txt")),
      gof.FUN=sum_gof,
      obs=c(0, 0),
      verbose=FALSE
    )
  )

  out$gofs
}
#> [1] 3.5 6.0
```
